Let's start with the problem of the imbalanced data,
which significantly affects the classification problems.
Let's discuss it by taking a real‑life example.
Suppose that your boss asks you to design a fraud detection system.
You trained the model with life data where 98% of cases are legit
and only 2% of the cases are fraudulent.
Your model is doing good, and you are happy with it and
decide to deploy it to the production.
The first legitimate case comes, and your model successfully
categorizes it as legit. And the second legit case comes, and your
model again successfully categorizes it as legitimate.
However, when the eighth fraudulent request comes,
the model failed to identify it correctly as fraudulent and made it legit.
Hence,
this machine learning model has put the organization under a security threat.
But why did that happen in the first place?
Well,
since the natural life data is that most of the cases are okay and very
few cases are fraudulent, our model did not learn enough about
fraudulent cases, and in that scenario, we say that our data is
imbalanced. So let's discuss the possible solutions to handle the
imbalanced data. The first strategy would be that we under sample the
majority of classes in our data.
In our previous example,
that means we take less samples from the legitimate cases.
The second strategy would be to over sample the minority
classes of the data by replicating some problem instances
of the less‑occurring category.
In our previous example,
that would mean we will duplicate fraudulent records and, hence,
increase their weight in the training base.
The third strategy would involve generating scientific data.
Scientific data is data that's generated based on the current
characteristics of our dataset. In our previous example,
it would be if we know that most fraudulent cases occur within a certain
time frame from a specific geographical area, we can generate similar
instances by looking at these characteristics. All these approaches aim at
rebalancing (partially or fully) the dataset.
However,
a detailed mathematical discussion about them is outside the scope of our course.